doc/getting-started.rst, before:

Getting Started
###############

Platform Dependencies
=====================

Each supported platform has a set of dependencies which are required in order to
build ComputeAorta.

* `Ubuntu 20.04`_
* `Windows 10`_

Once the platform dependencies have been installed please read the
:doc:`/developer-guide` for more information about building and contributing to
ComputeAorta.

Ubuntu 20.04
------------

On an x86-64 host system these are the minimum requirements to build
ComputeAorta. These packages are required for any build configuration.

* `GCC <https://gcc.gnu.org/>`_
* `Git`_
* `CMake`_ 3.4.3+
* `Python`_ 3.6.9+
* `Vulkan SDK`_ 1.1.97+ or `SPIRV-Tools`_ v2019.2+ for OpenCL only

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt update
   $ sudo apt install -y build-essential git cmake libtinfo-dev python3

Recommended for Ubuntu 20.04
............................

* `Ninja`_ is a useful, fast, build tool. To use it pass ``-GNinja`` to
  `CMake`_ the first time it configures a build directory.
* `clang-format`_ 9, is a tool to format
  C/C++/Java/JavaScript/Objective-C/Protobuf code. All ComputeAorta source files
  are required to be formatted before being committed to the repository,
  including source files which are generated by the build.
* `lit`_ is a portable tool for executing LLVM and Clang style test suites.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt update
   $ sudo apt install -y ninja-build clang-format-9 doxygen python3-pip
   $ sudo pip3 install lit virtualenv cmakelint

.. tip::
   If you are on Ubuntu 22.04 or later, clang-format-9 is not available using apt.
   You can get the pre-built package 
   `here <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/download/llvmorg-9.0.1/clang+llvm-9.0.1-x86_64-linux-gnu-ubuntu-16.04.tar.xz/>`_.
   Take the ``clang-format`` binary and add it to your :envvar:`PATH`.

.. tip::
   For ease of use ``python3`` and ``pip3`` can be symlinked to ``python`` and
   ``pip`` with the following commands:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ sudo apt install python-is-python3
      $ sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/pip pip `which pip3` 30

32-bit Compile
..............

Install the 32-bit C and C++ standard libraries, LLVM also depends on the 32-bit
terminal info library.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y gcc-9-multilib g++-9-multilib libc6-dev:i386 lib32tinfo-dev

.. warning::
   The ``gcc-multilib`` and ``g++-multilib`` packages conflict with the Arm and
   AArch64 toolchain packages below. To install the 32 bit libraries at the same
   time use ``gcc-9-multilib``, ``g++-9-multilib``, and ``libc6-dev:i386`` that
   ``gcc-multilib`` and ``g++-multilib`` depend on but do not conflict with the
   Arm and AArch64 toolchain packages.

Arm 32-bit Cross Compile
........................

In addition to the `32-bit <32-bit Compile>`_ packages, install the Arm
toolchain.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y gcc-9-arm-linux-gnueabihf g++-9-arm-linux-gnueabihf

Arm 64-bit (AArch64) Cross Compile
..................................

Install the AArch64 toolchain.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y gcc-9-aarch64-linux-gnu g++-9-aarch64-linux-gnu

Windows 10
----------

On an x86-64 Windows 10 host system these are the minimum requirements to build
ComputeAorta. These tools are required for any build configuration.

* `Visual Studio <https://www.visualstudio.com/>`_ 2017 or 2019
* `Git`_
* `CMake`_ 3.4.3+
* `Python`_ 3.6.9+
* `Vulkan SDK`_ 1.1.97+

Windows 10 does not provide an adequate package manager. However, the
third-party `Chocolatey <https://chocolatey.org/install#install-with-cmdexe>`_
package manager can be used to install the required packages.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y python
   $ choco install -y cmake --installargs 'ADD_CMAKE_TO_PATH=System'

There are a number of choices for installing Git on Windows, the recommended
approach is to install `Cmder`_ which bundles Git, various UNIX core utilities,
and an improved ``cmd.exe`` user experience.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y cmder

Alternatively, to install `Git for Windows <https://git-scm.com/download/win>`_
and forego using `Cmder`_ do the following.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y git

Recommended for Windows 10
..........................

* `Ninja`_ is a useful, fast, build tool, to use it pass ``-GNinja`` to `CMake`_
  the first time it configures a build directory.
* `clang-format`_ 9, is a tool to format
  C/C++/Java/JavaScript/Objective-C/Protobuf code, all ComputeAorta source files
  are required to be formatted before being committed to the repository,
  including source files which are generated by the build.
* `lit`_ is a portable tool for executing LLVM and Clang style test suites.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y ninja llvm doxygen.install
   $ pip install lit virtualenv cmakelint

Vulkan SDK
----------

For Vulkan support the Vulkan SDK is required to be installed. It can be
acquired from `LunarG <https://www.lunarg.com/vulkan-sdk/>`_. The latest version
should always be supported. The minimum supported version is 1.1.97.

The Vulkan SDK includes `SPIRV-Tools`_ as part of the package. Therefore
`SPIRV-Tools`_ does not need to be installed separately.

Package Manager Installation
............................

Users of Ubuntu 20.04 and later should configure their apt package manager to
install the Vulkan SDK packages directly as described by the `LunarG Vulkan SDK
packages`_ page. This installation method does neither set nor require the
:envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` environment variable, avoiding the configuration
complexities experienced when installing manually.

Windows 10 users can install the `Vulkan SDK Chocolatey`_ package:

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y vulkan-sdk

Manual Installation
...................

Other Linux users will need to take some extra steps after downloading the
tarball distribution. First run the ``build_tools.sh`` script; then source the
``setup-env.sh`` script whilst the Vulkan SDK directory as the current
directory. These steps are needed to access the ``spirv-as`` tool through the
:envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` environment variable in order to successfully compile
ComputeAorta and generate all test suites correctly.

.. hint::
   Modifying ``.bashrc`` to source the ``setup-env.sh`` script avoids having to
   remember to do this on every new terminal session building ComputeAorta.

The ``setup-env.sh`` script prepends :envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` to the system
:envvar:`PATH`, leading to prioritization of :envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` binaries
ahead of any other versions of the tools which may be installed in ``/usr/bin``.

SPIRV-Tools
-----------

When OpenCL support is required but Vulkan support is not, `SPIRV-Tools`_
**must** be installed on the system :envvar:`PATH`. Follow the build
instructions, or install the pre-built binaries in the repository. It's harder
to pin down versions of `SPIRV-Tools`_ since they don't do releases, but we
should support any commit from after January 2019.

Ubuntu 20.04 users can install ``spirv-tools`` from the package repository:

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y spirv-tools

.. warning::
   As the `LunarG Vulkan SDK packages`_ and the ``spirv-tools`` package both
   provide `SPIRV-Tools`_ builds, it is possible these packages may conflict
   causing issues during installation. Choose one or the other.

.. _Git: https://git-scm.com/
.. _CMake: https://cmake.org/
.. _Python: https://www.python.org/
.. _Ninja: https://ninja-build.org/
.. _clang-format: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html
.. _lit: https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/lit.html
.. _Cmder: https://cmder.net/
.. _SPIRV-Tools: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Tools
.. _LunarG Vulkan SDK packages: https://packages.lunarg.com/
.. _Vulkan SDK Chocolatey: https://community.chocolatey.org/packages/vulkan-sdk

Commit message:

Update supported versions of LLVM and Ubuntu in the docs

doc/getting-started.rst, after:

Getting Started
###############

Platform Dependencies
=====================

Each supported platform has a set of dependencies which are required in order to
build ComputeAorta.

* `Ubuntu 20.04`_
* `Ubuntu 22.04`_
* `Windows 10`_

Once the platform dependencies have been installed please read the
:doc:`/developer-guide` for more information about building and contributing to
ComputeAorta.

Ubuntu 20.04
------------

On an x86-64 host system these are the minimum requirements to build
ComputeAorta. These packages are required for any build configuration.

* `GCC <https://gcc.gnu.org/>`_
* `Git`_
* `CMake`_ 3.4.3+
* `Python`_ 3.6.9+
* `Vulkan SDK`_ 1.1.97+ or `SPIRV-Tools`_ v2019.2+ for OpenCL only

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt update
   $ sudo apt install -y build-essential git cmake libtinfo-dev python3

Recommended for Ubuntu 20.04
............................

* `Ninja`_ is a useful, fast, build tool. To use it pass ``-GNinja`` to
  `CMake`_ the first time it configures a build directory.
* `clang-format`_ 9, is a tool to format
  C/C++/Java/JavaScript/Objective-C/Protobuf code. All ComputeAorta source files
  are required to be formatted before being committed to the repository,
  including source files which are generated by the build.
* `lit`_ is a portable tool for executing LLVM and Clang style test suites.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt update
   $ sudo apt install -y ninja-build clang-format-9 doxygen python3-pip
   $ sudo pip3 install lit virtualenv cmakelint

.. tip::
   If you are on Ubuntu 22.04 or later, clang-format-9 is not available using apt.
   You can get the pre-built package 
   `here <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/download/llvmorg-9.0.1/clang+llvm-9.0.1-x86_64-linux-gnu-ubuntu-16.04.tar.xz/>`_.
   Take the ``clang-format`` binary and add it to your :envvar:`PATH`.

.. tip::
   For ease of use ``python3`` and ``pip3`` can be symlinked to ``python`` and
   ``pip`` with the following commands:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ sudo apt install python-is-python3
      $ sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/pip pip `which pip3` 30

32-bit Compile
..............

Install the 32-bit C and C++ standard libraries, LLVM also depends on the 32-bit
terminal info library.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y gcc-9-multilib g++-9-multilib libc6-dev:i386 lib32tinfo-dev

.. warning::
   The ``gcc-multilib`` and ``g++-multilib`` packages conflict with the Arm and
   AArch64 toolchain packages below. To install the 32 bit libraries at the same
   time use ``gcc-9-multilib``, ``g++-9-multilib``, and ``libc6-dev:i386`` that
   ``gcc-multilib`` and ``g++-multilib`` depend on but do not conflict with the
   Arm and AArch64 toolchain packages.

Arm 32-bit Cross Compile
........................

In addition to the `32-bit <32-bit Compile>`_ packages, install the Arm
toolchain.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y gcc-9-arm-linux-gnueabihf g++-9-arm-linux-gnueabihf

Arm 64-bit (AArch64) Cross Compile
..................................

Install the AArch64 toolchain.

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y gcc-9-aarch64-linux-gnu g++-9-aarch64-linux-gnu

Ubuntu 22.04
------------

Support for Ubuntu 22.04 is still experimental.

Windows 10
----------

On an x86-64 Windows 10 host system these are the minimum requirements to build
ComputeAorta. These tools are required for any build configuration.

* `Visual Studio <https://www.visualstudio.com/>`_ 2017 or 2019
* `Git`_
* `CMake`_ 3.4.3+
* `Python`_ 3.6.9+
* `Vulkan SDK`_ 1.1.97+

Windows 10 does not provide an adequate package manager. However, the
third-party `Chocolatey <https://chocolatey.org/install#install-with-cmdexe>`_
package manager can be used to install the required packages.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y python
   $ choco install -y cmake --installargs 'ADD_CMAKE_TO_PATH=System'

There are a number of choices for installing Git on Windows, the recommended
approach is to install `Cmder`_ which bundles Git, various UNIX core utilities,
and an improved ``cmd.exe`` user experience.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y cmder

Alternatively, to install `Git for Windows <https://git-scm.com/download/win>`_
and forego using `Cmder`_ do the following.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y git

Recommended for Windows 10
..........................

* `Ninja`_ is a useful, fast, build tool, to use it pass ``-GNinja`` to `CMake`_
  the first time it configures a build directory.
* `clang-format`_ 9, is a tool to format
  C/C++/Java/JavaScript/Objective-C/Protobuf code, all ComputeAorta source files
  are required to be formatted before being committed to the repository,
  including source files which are generated by the build.
* `lit`_ is a portable tool for executing LLVM and Clang style test suites.

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y ninja llvm doxygen.install
   $ pip install lit virtualenv cmakelint

Vulkan SDK
----------

For Vulkan support the Vulkan SDK is required to be installed. It can be
acquired from `LunarG <https://www.lunarg.com/vulkan-sdk/>`_. The latest version
should always be supported. The minimum supported version is 1.1.97.

The Vulkan SDK includes `SPIRV-Tools`_ as part of the package. Therefore
`SPIRV-Tools`_ does not need to be installed separately.

Package Manager Installation
............................

Users of Ubuntu 20.04 and later should configure their apt package manager to
install the Vulkan SDK packages directly as described by the `LunarG Vulkan SDK
packages`_ page. This installation method does neither set nor require the
:envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` environment variable, avoiding the configuration
complexities experienced when installing manually.

Windows 10 users can install the `Vulkan SDK Chocolatey`_ package:

.. code-block:: console

   $ choco install -y vulkan-sdk

Manual Installation
...................

Other Linux users will need to take some extra steps after downloading the
tarball distribution. First run the ``build_tools.sh`` script; then source the
``setup-env.sh`` script whilst the Vulkan SDK directory as the current
directory. These steps are needed to access the ``spirv-as`` tool through the
:envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` environment variable in order to successfully compile
ComputeAorta and generate all test suites correctly.

.. hint::
   Modifying ``.bashrc`` to source the ``setup-env.sh`` script avoids having to
   remember to do this on every new terminal session building ComputeAorta.

The ``setup-env.sh`` script prepends :envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` to the system
:envvar:`PATH`, leading to prioritization of :envvar:`VULKAN_SDK` binaries
ahead of any other versions of the tools which may be installed in ``/usr/bin``.

SPIRV-Tools
-----------

When OpenCL support is required but Vulkan support is not, `SPIRV-Tools`_
**must** be installed on the system :envvar:`PATH`. Follow the build
instructions, or install the pre-built binaries in the repository. It's harder
to pin down versions of `SPIRV-Tools`_ since they don't do releases, but we
should support any commit from after January 2019.

Ubuntu 20.04 users can install ``spirv-tools`` from the package repository:

.. code-block:: console

   $ sudo apt install -y spirv-tools

.. warning::
   As the `LunarG Vulkan SDK packages`_ and the ``spirv-tools`` package both
   provide `SPIRV-Tools`_ builds, it is possible these packages may conflict
   causing issues during installation. Choose one or the other.

.. _Git: https://git-scm.com/
.. _CMake: https://cmake.org/
.. _Python: https://www.python.org/
.. _Ninja: https://ninja-build.org/
.. _clang-format: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html
.. _lit: https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/lit.html
.. _Cmder: https://cmder.net/
.. _SPIRV-Tools: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Tools
.. _LunarG Vulkan SDK packages: https://packages.lunarg.com/
.. _Vulkan SDK Chocolatey: https://community.chocolatey.org/packages/vulkan-sdk
